updates to scheduler, jobs, wf, reminders docs (#4514)
dapr/docs: daprdocs/content/en/concepts/dapr-services/scheduler.md

description: "Overview of the Dapr scheduler service"
---

The Dapr Scheduler service is used to schedule different types of jobs, running in [self-hosted mode]({{< ref self-hosted >}}) or on [Kubernetes]({{< ref kubernetes >}}). 
- Jobs created through the Jobs API

> - Actor reminder jobs (used by the Actor Reminders feature)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Actor reminder jobs (used by the actor reminders)
```

> - Actor reminder jobs created by the Workflow API (which uses Actor Reminders under the hood)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Actor reminder jobs created by the Workflow API (which uses actor reminders)
```

> As of Dapr v1.15, the Scheduler service is used by default to schedule actor reminders as well as actor reminders under the hood for the Workflow API. All of these jobs are tracked by the Scheduler service and stored in an embedded etcd database. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From Dapr v1.15, the Scheduler service is used by default to schedule actor reminders as well as actor reminders for the Workflow API.
```

Reviewer: The etcd database is mentioned below, hence removing from this duplicate.

> There is no concept of a leader Scheduler instance. All Scheduler service replicas are considered peers. All receive jobs to be scheduled for execution and the jobs are divvied up between the available Scheduler service replicas for trigger load balancing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is no concept of a leader Scheduler instance. All Scheduler service replicas are considered peers. All receive jobs to be scheduled for execution and the jobs are allocated between the available Scheduler service replicas for load balancing of the trigger events.
```

The diagram below shows how the Scheduler service is used via the jobs API when called from your application. All the jobs that are tracked by the Scheduler service are stored in an embedded etcd database. 

<img src="/images/scheduler/scheduler-architecture.png" alt="Diagram showing the Scheduler control plane service and the jobs API">

## Actor reminders

Prior to Dapr v1.15, [actor reminders]({{< ref "actors-timers-reminders.md#actor-reminders" >}}) were run using the Placement service. Now, by default, the [`SchedulerReminders` feature flag]({{< ref "support-preview-features.md#current-preview-features" >}}) is set to `true`, and all new actor reminders you create are run using the Scheduler service to make them more scalable.

> When you deploy Dapr v1.15, any _existing_ actor reminders are automatically migrated from the Placement service to the Scheduler service as a one time operation for each actor type. There will be _no_ loss of reminder triggers during the migration. However, you can prevent this migration and keep the existing actor reminders running using the Placement service by setting the `SchedulerReminders` flag to `false` in application configuration file for the actor type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you deploy Dapr v1.15, any _existing_ actor reminders are automatically migrated from the Placement service to the Scheduler service as a one time operation for each actor type. There will be _no_ loss of reminder triggers during the migration. However, you can prevent this migration and keep the existing actor reminders running using the Placement service by setting the `SchedulerReminders` flag to `false` in the application configuration file for the actor type.
```

> ## Job Triggering

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Job triggering
```

> ### Job Ordering

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Job ordering
```

> When the Scheduler service triggers a job there is no guarantee of job trigger ordering, meaning we do not guarantee FIFO or LIFO trigger ordering. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the Scheduler service triggers a job there is no guarantee of job trigger ordering, meaning there are no guarantees on FIFO or LIFO trigger ordering. 
```

> ### Job Failure Policy and Staging Queue

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Job failure policy and staging queue
```

There is no concept of a leader Scheduler instance. All Scheduler service replicas are considered peers. All receive jobs to be scheduled for execution and the jobs are divvied up between the available Scheduler service replicas for trigger load balancing.

The diagram below shows how the Scheduler service is used via the jobs API when called from your application. All the jobs that are tracked by the Scheduler service are stored in an embedded etcd database. 

<img src="/images/scheduler/scheduler-architecture.png" alt="Diagram showing the Scheduler control plane service and the jobs API">

## Actor reminders

Prior to Dapr v1.15, [actor reminders]({{< ref "actors-timers-reminders.md#actor-reminders" >}}) were run using the Placement service. Now, by default, the [`SchedulerReminders` feature flag]({{< ref "support-preview-features.md#current-preview-features" >}}) is set to `true`, and all new actor reminders you create are run using the Scheduler service to make them more scalable.

> When you deploy Dapr v1.15, any _existing_ actor reminders are automatically migrated from the Placement service to the Scheduler service as a one time operation for each actor type. There will be _no_ loss of reminder triggers during the migration. However, you can prevent this migration and keep the existing actor reminders running using the Placement service by setting the `SchedulerReminders` flag to `false` in application configuration file for the actor type.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you deploy Dapr v1.15, any _existing_ actor reminders are automatically migrated from the Actor State Store to the Scheduler service as a one time operation for each actor type. There will be _no_ loss of reminder triggers during the migration. However, you can prevent this migration and keep the existing actor reminders running using the Actor State Store by setting the `SchedulerReminders` flag to `false` in application configuration file for the actor type.
```

## Job Triggering

### Job Ordering

> When the Scheduler service triggers a job there is no guarantee of job trigger ordering, meaning we do not guarantee FIFO or LIFO trigger ordering. 

Reviewer 2: We absolutely guarantee that a job will not be re-triggered until the previous trigger of the same job has been successful, or has elapsed its failure policy.

IMO, we shouldn't mention any kind of queue here as it's confusing. Job triggering is distributed and concurrent. There is no relationship between one job and another.

Author: removed this section. It was initially added bc there were questions about it on discord.

### Job Failure Policy and Staging Queue

> When the Scheduler service triggers a job and it has a client side error, with the failure policy, the job is retried by default with a 1s interval and 3 maximum retries. A failure policy can be configured for a consistent retry or to drop a job. 

Reviewer 2: Don't mention failure policy. This isn't exposed to the user yet.

```suggestion
When the Scheduler service triggers a job and it has a client side error the job is retried by default with a 1s interval and 3 maximum retries. A failure policy can be configured for a consistent retry or to drop a job. 
```

Reviewer 2: There is no way to configure failure policy today.

Author: Failure policy is configured for reminders that are oneshot is why I added it here and not in the jobs api. I can remove it as an implementation detail until its added to the jobs api if you would prefer, but I originally added it because there are a bunch of questions about this in discord.

Author: lmk if you want this changed still otherwise I'll assume you are good with my changes to this section

Reviewer: @cicoyle  - Still unclear having this sentence "A failure policy can be configured for a consistent retry or to drop a job. " when there is nothing a user can apply, yes?" Can we remove this for now?

Author: sure I can remove entirely

Author: oh, I actually already removed that sentence if you look at the actual diff. I think this is a stale comment. rn it reads: 
```
### Job Failure Policy and Staging Queue

When the Scheduler service triggers a job and it has a client side error, the job is retried by default with a 1s interval and 3 maximum retries. 

For non-client side errors, for example, when a job cannot be sent to an available Dapr sidecar at trigger time, it is placed in a staging queue within the Scheduler service. Jobs remain in this queue until a suitable sidecar instance becomes available, at which point they are automatically sent to the appropriate Dapr sidecar instance.
```

Even tho the failure policy is not configurable, I feel the senetences still ring true and provide insights for users that are applicable.

> - Actor reminder type jobs retry forever until successful completion.

Reviewer 2: They do not. They try 3 times with a 1s interval

Author: I thought that too, but saw your comment here in discord and put what you mentioned in discord assuming you knew thing I didn't - will remove 👍🏻 
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/ad2fdeb7-785a-4ebc-81da-9e406254c3cb)

- Workflow reminders are one time, meaning they only trigger once successfully with a 1 second retry interval.

> For non-client side errors, for example, when a job cannot be sent to an available Dapr sidecar at trigger time, it is placed in a staging queue within the Scheduler service. Jobs remain in this queue until a suitable sidecar instance becomes available, at which point they are automatically sent to the appropriate Dapr sidecar instance. Jobs are sent back to a single replica for the same app ID that scheduled the job in a round robin manner.

Reviewer 2: We should not mention round robin anywhere. The docs should only read "randomly load balanced".

Yes, technically there is a round robin implementation, but the logic is (kinda intentionally) incredibly fragile and will be reset during any connection event. Users _should not_ rely or try to coerce job scheduling to become round robin, and instead assume completely random.

For users who wish to have locality for their jobs, they should instead use actor reminders.

For users who wish to have jobs triggered on the same host which created it, they should create an actor reminder using an actor type that is a random UUID unique to that replica to enforce perfect locality.

## Job Locality

### Default Job Behavior

By default, when the Scheduler service triggers jobs, they are sent back to a single replica for the same app ID that scheduled the job in a randomly load balanced manner. This provides basic load balancing across your application's replicas, which is suitable for most use cases where strict locality isn't required.

### Using Actor Reminders for Perfect Locality

For users who require perfect job locality (having jobs triggered on the exact same host that created them), actor reminders provide a solution. To enforce perfect locality for a job:

1. Create an actor type with a random UUID that is unique to the specific replica
2. Use this actor type to create an actor reminder

This approach ensures that the job will always be triggered on the same host which created it, rather than being randomly distributed among replicas.

## Job Triggering

### Job Ordering

> When the Scheduler service triggers a job there is no guarantee of job trigger ordering, meaning there are no guarantees on FIFO or LIFO trigger ordering. 

Reviewer: @cicoyle Based on Josh's comment let's delete this section on Job ordering, or simply say they are guaranteed to be fired one after the  other.

The Scheduler service is deployed as part of `dapr init -k`, or via the Dapr Helm charts. You can run Scheduler in high availability (HA) mode. [Learn more about setting HA mode in your Kubernetes service.]({{< ref "kubernetes-production.md#individual-service-ha-helm-configuration" >}})

> When a Kubernetes namespace is cleaned up, all the jobs corresponding to that namespace are also cleaned up preventing unnecessary resource and memory usage in the embedded etcd.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When a Kubernetes namespace is deleted, all the Job and Actor Reminders corresponding to that namespace are deleted.
```

## Disabling the Scheduler service

> If you are not using any features that require the Scheduler service (Jobs API, Actor Reminders, or Workflows), you can disable it by setting `global.scheduler.enabled=false`.

Reviewer: This annotation needs to be added into the reference doc here https://docs.dapr.io/reference/arguments-annotations-overview/ 
Are there any other missing for the scheduler service?

Author: I'll take a look & confirm its updated

Reviewer: @cicoyle Any update here?

Author: Had to pause docs updates to fix a dapr runtime bug. The `global.scheduler.enabled` is a helm flag, not annotation. There are no additional annotations that I see needed for scheduler on dapr. I dont see an exact page that notes helm flags. Can you point me to one where I may add that flag? As is, its only noted in the `scheduler.md` pg
